### Problem Statement

Much of [[social-choice-theory]] focuses on voting procedures for non-binary choices, such as electing a representative or series of representatives to represent them as a group. However once a series of representatives are selected, there is little discussion of what method they should use to select an outcome for binary decisions. The two dominant strategies are the [[simple-majority-rule]] and [[super-majority-rule]] rule. As discussed further below, there are many reasons these two rules have emerged as the dominant procedure for determining the outcome of a binary decision, but many of these justifications are grounded in the set of fairness criteria outlined by [[mays-theorem]]. 

One of the primary challenges of majority rule, however, is that a party or coalition which controls just 51% of the vote (and consistently votes as a block) can determine the outcome for 100% of the binary decisions put before the voting body. Conversely, in a system that requires a super majority to determine the outcome of a binary decision, a minority party or coalition with just 34% of the vote can block the passage of 100% of binary decisions. Additionally, when an electoral body that uses a simple majority as its binary decision rule has been elected by a non-proportional voting system like [[first-past-the-post]], it's possible for representatives chosen by a minority of the electorate to determine 100% of the binary decisions put before that body.

These consequences raise a series of questions that challenge both the definition of fairness proposed by Mays and the reliability of majority rule as an instrument for collective decision-making, namely:

- Can a binary decision rule be "fair" if the outcomes of all decisions made by an electoral body reflect the interests of only a subset of its members. 
- Is it possible to define fairness in the context of a binary decision in a way that is proportional to the distribution of interests within an electoral body?
- What binary decision rule could satisfy a proportional definition of fairness, if one exists?


[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[social-choice-theory]: ../concepts/social-choice-theory "social-choice-theory"
[simple-majority-rule]: ../concepts/simple-majority-rule "simple-majority-rule"
[super-majority-rule]: ../concepts/super-majority-rule "super-majority-rule"
[mays-theorem]: ../concepts/mays-theorem "mays-theorem"
[first-past-the-post]: ../concepts/first-past-the-post "first-past-the-post"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"